# DRAFT - wild 20's

A couple nights ago, an idea came to me before bed for a "game" framework to help structure production sessions.

There are a number of frequently occuring problems I experience in collaborative production sessions. When working with diverse groups of musicians, often times there is a surplus of creativity and a lack of unified direction. The creativity surplus is intuitive, musicians around instruments, toys, and recording equipment naturally come up with a lot of ideas. The pace at which these ideas are generated often outpaces the cognitive/emotional ability of the room to internalize and understand these ideas. Coming up with an idea is usually effortless, however a high level of effort is required to:

1) determine whether you think your idea is good
2) effectively express & communicate your idea to others
3) validate that others understand your idea
4) determine whether others think your idea is good

In a volatile creative environment, stepping through this checklist takes a lot of effort. At any given time, everyone in the room is usually working through these steps for their own idea(s) simultaneously which often leads to difficulty communicating, frustration, losing ideas because of distractions, etc. On top of this, there often exist complex social dynamics between people in the room that inhibit efficient flow of ideas. Maintining the vibe of a session requires a high degree of intangible social and emotional intelligence to strike the right balance between being polite, self-aware, aggressive, fast, and tasteful.

As sessions progress, the room generates hundereds of ideas that all coalesce into each individual's perception of what direction a song will/should go. Often times this notion is different for everyone in the room. At certain points you may generate a new idea, or feel the direction drifting off-course from your path and undergo a rush of uncertainty, not knowing if:

- you should attempt to re-direct the session's energy
- doing so would be percieved as pushy/controlling
- re-directing would upset someone else's flow
- your idea is worth pursuing redirection

Making a good decision in this circumstance is critical but often incredibly challenging because of the high degree of time & social pressure in a session environment. With time and experience (years to decades) producers and artists develop the soft-skills required to benevolently guide a session towards productivity, efficiency, and optimal emotional/social energy. I personally find that younger, inexperienced producers/artists often times have better ideas than people who "know what they're doing" despite potnetially lacking in some of the areas mentioned above.

With this dichotomy in mind, I have been thinking deeply about how to create a framework for sessions that

- Democratize the execution of ideas
Taking turns
Inexperienced artists/producers should have a chance to express their ideas without having to feel pushy or aggressive.

- Reduce disruptions to session flow
Taking turns
Allow new ideas to be presented in such a way as to minimize disruptions to session flow.

- limits the potential for divergence from the "first idea"
Try not to lose sight of the original source of inspiration. Reverts.

- Prevent vibe death from execution of long/tedious tangential ideas.
Time limit.

- Promote efficient workflow without hurting feelings

**Problems:**
- too many ideas
- too many people with different ideas
- forgetting / losing ideas

# wild 20s
Can be played with 2-8 people, optimally 4-6.

## Roles:
- **The Artist** - The player who's song/record is being worked on.
- **The Producer** - The current session leader.
- **The Others** - Assistants to the Producer.

## Gameplay:
### Setup
1. Decide turns by assigning players a number 1-6.
	- *If playing with less than six, the Artist assigns an additional number to player(s) until all numbers are used.*
2. Once all numbers 1-6 have been assigned, the artist rolls a die.
	- *If playing with more than six, use a 1-8 random number generator to "roll".*
3. The player who was assigned the number rolled becomes **The Producer**.
4. Subsequent turn order follows in numerical order of assigned numbers.
	- *If playing with less than 6, players that were assigned two numbers should only get added to the turn order once.*
 
***Example:***
| player | number(s) |
|-------|------------|
| Paul | 1, 5 |
| Ringo | 2 |
| George | 3, 6 |
| John | 4 |

**Dice roll:** 4

**Turn Order:** John, Paul, George, Ringo

## Turns
1. The Producer is given 20 minutes to take creative reign of the session. Before the turn begins, a snapshot of the DAW session should be created and a 2-track bounce should be exported.
2. The Others (all players who are not the Producer) obey the Producer until the turn is over.
3. Any ideas generated by someone who is not the Producer should be remembered/saved/recorded in an unintrusive way for their turn (written, memo, etc.)
4. At the end of 20 minutes, a snapshot of all progress in the DAW is saved as a new copy/alternative and a 2-track is bounced out labelled with the current Producer's name.
5. While progress is being saved, a retrospective period begins. During this time, players have the opportunity to take a break and discuss. The retrospective period should not exceed five minutes.
6. All players then vote to decide between allowing the current Producer to take another turn or passing the turn to the next Producer.
	- *In the event of a tie, the artist serves as the tie-breaker.*
7. At the end of each Producer's turn, the next Producer has the option to continue where the last producer left off, or revert to the next most recent snapshot of the session.
8. After all players have had a turn as Producer **or** six turns have passed, all players must take a 20 minute break from the game.
9. When the session is over, all revisions of 2-track bounces should be distributed to each player.


#production #music #philosophy #workflow #methodology #games